# Evernode Community Edition (CE)

This HOWTO contains instructions on how to build and configure your own instance of Ever OS Full Node to connect your application to Everscale. The instructions and scripts below were verified on Ubuntu 20.04.

# Table of Contents
- [Evernode Community Edition (CE)](#evernode-community-edition-ce)
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [What is Evernode Community Edition?](#what-is-evernode-community-edition)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [1. System Requirements](#1-system-requirements)
  - [2. Prerequisites](#2-prerequisites)
    - [2.1 Set the Environment](#21-set-the-environment)
    - [2.2 Install Dependencies](#22-install-dependencies)
    - [2.3 Deploy Full Node](#23-deploy-full-node)
- [Stopping, restarting and deleting DApp Server](#stopping-restarting-and-deleting-dapp-server)
- [Redeploying DApp Server](#redeploying-dapp-server)

# What is Evernode Community Edition?

Evernode CE is a set of services enabling you to work with Everscale blockchain.

The core element of Evernode CE is [Ever OS node written in Rust](https://github.com/tonlabs/ton-labs-node) focused on performance and safety. Evernode CE provides a set of services serving TON SDK endpoint: scalable multi-model database [ArangoDB](https://www.arangodb.com/documentation/) with the information about all blockchain entities (like accounts, blocks, transactions, etc.) stored over time, distributed high-throughput, low-latency streaming platform [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/), [TON GraphQL Server](https://github.com/tonlabs/ton-q-server) (aka Q-Server) for serving GraphQL queries to the database and [Nginx](https://nginx.org/en/docs/) web-server.

All the Evernode CE services can be easily deployed with Docker/Docker Compose wrapped into unix shell scripts, provided below.

> **Note**: Rust node is included in the Evernode CE, and doesn't have to be installed separately.

# Getting Started

## 1. System Requirements
| Configuration | CPU (cores) | RAM (GiB) | Storage (GiB) | Network (Gbit/s)|
|---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| Recommended |24|128|2000|1| 

DApp Server is storage I/O bound, so NVMe SSD disks are recommended for the storage.

**Note**: To connect to a DApp Server you are running with client applications (such as [TONOS-CLI](https://github.com/tonlabs/tonos-cli#21-set-the-network-and-parameter-values)), it should have a domain name and a DNS record. Then its URL may be used to access it.

## 2. Prerequisites
### 2.1 Set the Environment
Adjust (if needed) `TON-OS-DApp-Server/scripts/env.sh`:
- specify the network - use main.ton.dev for the main network and net.ton.dev for the developer network
- specify notification email

Set environment variables:

    $ cd TON-OS-DApp-Server/scripts/
    $ . ./env.sh 


### 2.2 Install Dependencies
Ubuntu 20.04:

    $ ./install_deps.sh
    
**Note**: Make sure to add your user to the docker group, or run subsequent command as superuser:


    sudo usermod -a -G docker $USER


### 2.3 Deploy Full Node
Deploy full node:

    $ ./deploy.sh 2>&1 | tee ./deploy.log


**Note**: the log generated by this command will be located in the `TON-OS-DApp-Server/scripts/` folder and can be useful for troubleshooting.

# Stopping, restarting and deleting DApp Server

**Note**: call docker-compose commands from the `TON-OS-DApp-Server/docker-compose/ton-node` folder.
    
To stop the node use the following command:

    docker-compose stop

To restart a stopped node use the following command:
    
    docker-compose restart

To remove the node use the following commands:
    
    docker-compose down
    git reset --hard origin/master
    git clean -ffdx
    
**Warning**: all local files and changes will be deleted from the git tree.

# Redeploying DApp Server

Before redeploying DApp server, make sure to remove the node and reset the git branch:
    
    cd TON-OS-DApp-Server/docker-compose/ton-node
    docker-compose down
    git reset --hard origin/master
    git clean -ffdx

Otherwise redeployment will fail.
When the branch is reset, repeat steps 2.1 - 2.3.
